In recent years, the United States has faced a severe and escalating crisis of drug overdose deaths. This visualization provides an interactive look at provisional counts of drug overdose deaths across all 50 states and the District of Columbia from 2015 to 2023, using data from the National Vital Statistics System. It includes specific drug categories such as psychostimulants, synthetic opioids, heroin, methadone, natural and semi-synthetic opioids, and cocaine. Our interactive bar chart allows users to explore the number of overdose deaths by state for each drug category. Using the dropdown menu, viewers can examine how different types of drugs impact various regions, shedding light on the distribution of this national epidemic.
Upon deciding visualizations we were in between a choropleth and a stacked bar chart. We orginially though a choropleth would be a good decision since we were discussing drug overdose deaths over time for each state. We thought visualizing the state would be interesting. We discovered that in actuality it would be hard to convey this information for every drug over time for each state and decided to move forward with an interactive stacked bar chart. This allows the user to see overdoeses by state from each drug. We incorporated a dropdown menu for each year so that the user can also visualize the trends over time. Some transformations used included: filtering out irrelevant indicators (e.g., "Number of Drugs Specified" and "Percent with drugs specified") in the updateChart function and converting the transformed data into an array of objects (transformedData), where each object represents a state. Each key in these objects represents a drug type with the corresponding count of overdose deaths. This structure ended up allowing a stacked bar creation.
The work was split in the following manner: finding a dataset and creating a base structure, manipulating the base structure into different types of interactions and then settling on the best interaction. We each worked about 4-6 hours on the project and met regularly. First, we all agreed upon a dataset that was relevant culturally since we have all unfortunately seen the explosion of drug deaths across America. Then Luisa provided a basis for a starting path. She originally tried the choropleth but as stated above this did not work for what we wanted to accomplish. Luisa aggregated the years and found the total number of overdoeses for each drug per state in an interative bar chart. She also incorporated a dropdown menu to easily select the drug of interest for the visualization. Ann then tried to map out the bar chart for each year and incorporate a bar chart race however the bar chart race ended up looking cluttered on the page and she decided not to incorporate it. Ann incorporated data transformation techniques such as grouping the data by state and drug type (Indicator) using d3.rollups. For each group, a total count of overdose deaths is calculated using d3.sum, and the result is structured into a new nested array (data). She also incorporated a dropdown for the year in addition to the dropdown Luisa created for the drug type. This was done by extracting unique values for drug types (drugTypes) and years (years) to populate the dropdown menus for user selections. Ann also wrote the README file. Lauren helped bring everything together with the final stacked bar chart representation. Lauren transformed the data by filtering out irrelevant indicators ("Number of Drugs Specified" and "Percent with drugs specified") to simplify the visualization. She also restructured the grouped the data to contain an object for each state, where each key represents a drug type and its corresponding count. This enabled easy stacking by drug type within each state. The final representation allows the user to easily select a year via a dropdown menu and visualize the drug overdoses over time per each state via a stacked bar chart. When hovering over the stacked bar chart one will be able to see specifics such as the State, Total Deaths between 2015-2023, Drug, and the Deaths from that year. 
